HIV Databases
HIV sequence database
DATABASES

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/index> Sequence DB

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/mainpage.html> Immunology DB

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/immunology/index> Vaccine DB

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/vaccine/home.html> HCV DB

<http://hcv.lanl.gov/> HFV DB

<http://hfv.lanl.gov/>
SEARCH

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/components/sequence/HIV/search/search.html>
Search DB

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/components/sequence/HIV/search/search.html>
Advanced Search

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/components/sequence/HIV/asearch/map_db.comp>
Intra-patient Search

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/components/sequence/HIV/ipsearch/IPsearch.html> Next-gen
Sequences

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/components/sequence/HIV/sra/sra.comp> Geography

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/components/sequence/HIV/geo/geo.comp>
ALIGNMENTS

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/NEWALIGN/align.html> Curated
Alignments

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/NEWALIGN/align.html> Special
Interest
Alignments

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/SI_alignments/datasets.html>
TOOLS

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/HIVTools.html>
Index of all tools

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/HIVTools.html>	Heatmap

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HEATMAP/heatmap_mainpage.html>	Protein
Feature
Accent

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/PROTVIS/html/protvis.html>
Alignment Slicer

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/Slice_Align/index.html>	Hepitope

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/immunology/hepitopes/index.html>
Quality Control

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/QC/index.html>
AnalyzeAlign

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/ANALYZEALIGN/analyze_align.html>
Highlighter

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIGHLIGHT/highlighter_top.html>
QuickAlign

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/QUICK_ALIGNv2/QuickAlign.html>
AnnotateTree

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/ANNOTATETREE/annotatetree.html>
HIV BLAST

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/BASIC_BLAST/basic_blast.html>	Rainbow
Tree

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/RAINBOWTREE/rainbowtree.html>
Branchlength

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/BRANCHLENGTH/branchlength.html>
HIVAlign

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/VIRALIGN/viralign.html>
Recombinant HIV-1
Drawing Tool

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/DRAW_CRF/recom_mapper.html>
CATNAP

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/components/sequence/HIV/neutralization/index.html>
Hypermut

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HYPERMUT/hypermut.html>	RIP

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/RIP/RIP.html>
Codon Alignment

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/CodonAlign/codonalign.html>
IQ-TREE

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/IQTREE/iqtree.html>	SeqPublish

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/SeqPublish/seqpublish.html>
CombiNAber

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/COMBINABER/combinaber.html>
jpHMM at GOBICS

<http://jphmm.gobics.de/>	Sequence Locator

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/LOCATE/locate.html>
Consensus Maker

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/CONSENSUS/consensus.html>
Mosaic Vaccine
Tool Suite

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/MOSAIC/>	SNAP

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/SNAP/SNAP.html>
ELF

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/ELF/epitope_analyzer.html>
Motif Scan

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/immunology/motif_scan/motif_scan>	SUDI
Subtyping

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/SUDI/sudi.html>
ElimDupes

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/ELIMDUPES/elimdupes.html>
N-Glycosite

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/GLYCOSITE/glycosite.html>
SynchAlign

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/SYNCH_ALIGNS/SynchAligns.html>
Entropy

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/ENTROPY/entropy.html>	PCOORD

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/PCOORD/PCOORD.html>	Translate

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/TRANSLATE/translate.html>
Epigraph

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/EPIGRAPH/epigraph.html>	PepMap

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/PepMap/pepmap.html>	TreeMaker

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/components/sequence/HIV/treemaker/treemaker.html>
FindModel

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/findmodel/findmodel.html>	PeptGen

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/PEPTGEN/peptgen.html>	TreeRate

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/TREERATEv2/treerate.html>
Format Converter

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/FORMAT_CONVERSION/form.html>
PhyloPlace

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/phyloplace/PhyloPlace.html>
Variable Region Characteristics

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/VAR_REG_CHAR/index.html>
Gap Strip/Squeeze

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/GAPSTREEZE/gap.html>	PhyML

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/PHYML/interface.html>	VESPA

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/VESPA/vespa.html>
GenBank Entry Generation

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/GENBANK/genbank.html>	Pixel

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/pixel/pixel.html>	External Tools

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/links.html>
Gene Cutter

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/GENE_CUTTER/cutter.html>
Poisson-Fitter

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/POISSON_FITTER/pfitter.html>	

Genome Browser

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/genome_browser/browser.html>
PrimerDesign-M

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/PRIMER_DESIGN/primer_design.html>


PUBLICATIONS

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/COMPENDIUM/compendium.html>
Compendium
Downloads

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/COMPENDIUM/compendium.html>
Compendium
Review Articles

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/REVIEWS/reviews.html>
GUIDES

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/TUTORIALS/Tutorials.html>
Tutorials

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/TUTORIALS/Tutorials.html> CRFs

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/CRFs/CRFs.html> HIV-1
Gene Map

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/MAP/landmark.html>
In-depth Annotation

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/MAP/annotation.html>
Neutralizing Antibody
Resources & CATNAP

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/immunology/neutralizing_ab_resources.html>
3D Structure

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/STRUCTURE/INDEX.HTML> Data
Dictionary

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/data_dictionary/data_dictionary.html>
How to Cite
this Database

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/refer.html> HIV Database News

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/components/news/old_news.html> FAQs

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/FAQ.html> Links

<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/links.html>




  HIV Sequence Alignments

  * *Web Alignments <#web>* are nucleotide and protein alignments that
    represent the fullest spectrum of sequences in the database.
  * *Filtered Web Alignments <#filter>* are a filtered subset of
    sequences from the HIV-1 web alignments.
  * *Subtype Reference Alignments <#ref>* contain approximately 4
    representatives of each subtype.
  * *Compendium Alignments <#comp>* are the subset of sequences printed
    in the HIV Sequence Compendium
    <https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/COMPENDIUM/compendium.html>.

  * *Consensus/Ancestral Sequences <#consensus>* include a consensus for
    each subtype, an M-group consensus-of-consensuses, and some
    ancestral sequences.
  * *RIP Alignment* <#RIP> contains a consensus for each subtype and
    reference sequences for all groups, subtypes, and CRFs.

Before use, please read the additional information below.
Options
Alignment type 	

Organism	

Region 	Pre-defined region of the genome        


User-defined range **       Start:    End:    (Coordinates: HIV1-HXB2
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/MAP/landmark.html>,
HIV2-Mac239
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/REVIEWS/SIV_NUMBERING2001/SivNumbering.html>)

Subtype 	

DNA/Protein 	

Year * 	

Format 	



* “2008” alignment contains sequences published before 2009. The
Compendia
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/COMPENDIUM/compendium.html>
are published the year after the sequences were published, so the 2008
alignment appears in the 2009 compendium.

** User-defined ranges are clipped from a genome alignment. This option
is available only when genome alignments available .



------------------------------------------------------------------------


    Web Alignments


        What sequences are included

These alignments are complete, meaning that they contain all sequences
we have in the database, with some exceptions:

  * Only one sequence per patient
    <https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/components/sequence/HIV/search/help.html#one_per_patient>
    is included.
  * Very similar sequences have been deleted. The cut-off for deleting
    similar sequences has been determined by looking at the distance
    distribution, and varies by gene.
  * Problematic sequences
    <https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/components/sequence/HIV/search/help.html#bad_seq>
    are removed.


        How the sequences are aligned

These alignments were generated by an iterative process between
automated alignment using HMMER and manual editing using MASE, BioEdit
or Se-Al. Most gaps have been introduced in multiples of 3 bases to
maintain open reading frames. Any alignment is a compromise between
optimal alignment, readability, and an attempt to keep codons intact. In
particular the 'Other SIV' sequences are difficult to align, so please
consider these as a starting point for your analyses.


        Further details

Codons containing IUPAC
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HelpDocs/IUPAC.html>
multistate characters involved in silent substitutions are translated to
the correct amino acids; when this is not possible, they are translated
to 'X'.

The protein alignments provided for each gene were constructed using
both nucleotide and translated amino acid sequences. Because the
translations are based on alignments, they may differ from a straight,
non-aligned, translation. For instance, an aligned translation will
include frameshift compensation.

For all genome and single-gene DNA alignments, we have tried to keep the
reading frame intact. However, this doesn't always work out. Be cautious
when translating the aligned nucleotide sequences.

Sequences that are known to be recombinants are usually labeled as such,
even if they are not recombinant in the region under consideration.


        Relevant links

Codes and Symbols in Sequence Alignments
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HelpDocs/IUPAC.html>
How the HIV Database Classifies Sequence Subtypes
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HelpDocs/classification.html>



------------------------------------------------------------------------


    Filtered Web Alignments


        What sequences are included

The "filtered alignments" consist of a subset of sequences from the
original web alignments. Typically 80-95% of the sequences in the
corresponding Web Alignment are retained. The Filtered Alignments are
cleaner, but contain less information. They are only available for HIV-1.


        Excluded from the filtered genome alignment:

  * Sequences with >1% ambiguity codes
    <https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HelpDocs/IUPAC.html>.
  * Sequences with significant insertions or deletions (by manual curation).
  * This rule is not applied to group P.


        Excluded from the filtered protein region alignments:

  * Sequences with any ambiguity code
    <https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HelpDocs/IUPAC.html> that
    prevents translation of the codon.
  * Sequences with >1 frameshifts.
  * Sequences with >1% ambiguity codes
    <https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HelpDocs/IUPAC.html>.
  * Sequences with significant insertions or deletions (by manual curation).
  * These rules are not applied to group P.



------------------------------------------------------------------------


    Subtype Reference Alignments


        What sequences are included

For each subtype, 4 genomes were selected as being broadly
representative of that subtype. A paper describing the criteria used in
selecting the 2005 reference sequences is available online as an HTML
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/REVIEWS/RefSeqs2005/RefSeqs05.html>
or PDF
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/COMPENDIUM/2005/RefSeqs05.pdf>
file.


        How the sequences are named

The subtype, country
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HelpDocs/databasecountrycode.html>,
and year of isolation are given if they are defined in our database. If
the sequence name is undefined, the GenBank accession number appears
instead.


        Relevant links

Leitner, et al. 2005
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/REVIEWS/RefSeqs2005/RefSeqs05.html>,
a compendium review article describing the 2005 subtype reference set
Information about HIV and SIV subtype nomenclature
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HelpDocs/subtypes-more.html>
How the HIV Database Classifies Sequence Subtypes
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HelpDocs/classification.html>
Information about CRFs
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/CRFs/CRFs.html>
Codes and Symbols in Sequence Alignments
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HelpDocs/IUPAC.html>



------------------------------------------------------------------------


    Compendium alignments

The compendium alignments are a carefully-chosen subset of sequences
from the web alignment that are re-aligned and printed in the HIV
Sequence Compendium
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/COMPENDIUM/compendium.html>.
Because they need to fit in a limited space, this set is limited to ~200
sequences for HIV-1 and ~100 sequences for HIV-2 and SIV. We try to
include newer sequences in this set, in addition to subtype reference
sequences.



------------------------------------------------------------------------


    Consensus/Ancestral Sequences


        What sequences are included

We provide consensuses for the M group subtypes A (including A, A1, and
A2), B, C, D, F (including F1 and F2), and G; the circulating
recombinant forms CRF01 and CRF02; and group O. We also provide a
Consensus M-group, which is a consensus of consensus sequences for
subtypes A, B, C, D, F, G, H. Ancestral sequences are also provided.
Ancestral sequences are based on the Complete Genome M-group Ancestral
sequence and its phylogenetic tree. For more details, see M-group
Consensus Construction
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/CONSENSUS/M_GROUP/M_group_explanation>
explanation file.


        How the consensus alignments are made

The input alignments are the HIV Sequence Web Alignments. These
sequences have undergone additional annotation after retrieval.
Specifically, question marks in consensus sequences have been resolved,
and glycosylation sites have been aligned. From the input, consensus
sequences were built using our Consensus Maker
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/CONSENSUS/consensus.html> site.

The consensus sequences were calculated according to the default values
on the Consensus Maker
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/CONSENSUS/consensus.html>
tools except that they were computed for all subtypes having 3 or more
(rather than 4 or more) sequences in the alignment. If a column in a
subtype group contained equal numbers of two different letters, we
resolved that tie by looking at the same column throughout the M group
and using the most common letter as the consensus. An upper case letter
in a DNA consensus sequence indicates that the nucleotide is preserved
unanimously in that position in all sequences used to make the
consensus. In cases of nonunanimity, the most common nucleotide is shown
in lowercase. Regions spanned by multiple insertions and deletions are
difficult to align; we attempt to anchor alignments in such regions on
glycosylation sites, and to preserve the minimal elements that span such
regions.


        How the ancestral sequences are derived

The ancestral tree and sequences were built as described in Ancestral
Tree Construction
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/CONSENSUS/PREBUILT/AncestralTree.html>
explanation file.


        Interpreting the format of consensus sequences

An upper case letter in a DNA consensus sequence indicates that the
nucleotide is preserved in that position in all sequences used to make
the consensus. A lower case letter is the most common nucleotide in a
variable position.

PROTEIN sequences are always upper case letters.

The number of sequences used to make the consensus is indicated in
parentheses following the subtype designation.


        Reagent development

Consensus and Ancestral sequences from this web page are suitable for
reagent development because they do not contain question marks or
ambiguous characters.


        Relevant links

Consensus Maker Tools
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/CONSENSUS/consensus.html>
allow you to build a consensus from your own alignment according to your
preferences.
Consensus Maker Explanation page
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/CONSENSUS/AdvConExplain.html>
shows the output format options.
Ancestral Tree Construction
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/CONSENSUS/PREBUILT/AncestralTree.html>
explanation file.
M-group Consensus Construction
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HIV/CONSENSUS/M_GROUP/M_group_explanation>
explanation file.
Codes and Symbols in Sequence Alignments
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/HelpDocs/IUPAC.html>



------------------------------------------------------------------------


    RIP Alignment

This genome-length alignment serves as the Custom Background for the RIP
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/RIP/RIP.html> web tool. This
alignment has been assembled less systematically than the other
alignments offered here, meaning that the sequences have been added in
various years, as they have become available. We offer it because it has
proven useful for a variety of purposes.

This alignment contains:

  * Consensus sequences made in 2004 for subtypes A1, B, C, D, F1, F2,
    G, H and CRF01.
  * Consensus sequences made in 2004 for groups O and N.
  * Consensus sequences made in 2012 for subtypes A2 and J.
  * Subtype reference sequences for each subtype (A-K) and group (O-P).
    In most cases there are 4 sequences per subtype/group; in some cases
    there were fewer than 4 available for inclusion.
  * A single subtype reference sequence for CRF02 upward. All CRFs are
    included, up to the number that existed at the time the alignment
    was last updated. 


        Relevant links

Recombinant Identification Program (RIP)
<https://www.hiv.lanl.gov/content/sequence/RIP/RIP.html>
Circulating Recombinant Forms (CRFs)

 

 
last modified: Thu Sep 29 12:20 2016


Questions or <http://validator.w3.org/check?uri=referer> comments?
Contact us at seq-info@lanl.gov <mailto:seq-info@lanl.gov>.

 
 
